
# Project Proposal

Jinglan Lin & Nour Aboufadel

## Research question:
Living in highly urbanized cities such as Los Angeles, freeways have become harder for residents to avoid. Residences in close proximity to freeways have come with many consequences for Angelenos. Studies have linked air pollutants from freeways to adverse health effects. For our research project, we would like to explore how residing in close proximity to freeways correlates to hospitalizations rates. Our study will explore various air pollutants released from vehicles on freeways and hospitalization rates, looking at certain illnesses related to air pollution. Our study will also explore whether or not safe zones exist for LA City and how specific locations near the freeway contribute to hospitalization rates. Our research question is: *How does living near freeways impact hospitalizations rates?*

## Why is it important? 
Since the early 1900s, cars have gradually become one of the major means of transportation for people in the United States, especially in California. The layout of Southern California neighborhoods requires people to drive vehicles, getting to places in a more efficient way. In such a car-intensive area, vehicle pollutants have become one of the major contributing factors to air pollution and climate change. More importantly, air pollution has been linked to severe health issues including asthma and heart disease. People who live by freeways have higher chances of being exposed to these toxic pollutants, causing health problems. Therefore, we would like to explore the impact of vehicle pollutants on people's health, and to explore if there is a “safe” distance where people are not impacted by freeway vehicle pollution. Moreover, studies have shown that freeways tend to be constructed nearby low income neighborhoods, sometimes carving out communities. Our project also aims to use visualization to demonstrate environmental injustice in freeway planning.

## Spatial scope: 
We chose Los Angeles city as the primary space. One of the main objectives for our project is to explore freeway vehicle pollution in surrounding communities. Los Angeles city is an ideal location to study impacts because numerous freeways including US 101, I-405, I-10 and I-5 cross through downtown Los Angeles where a significant number of people commute to work on a daily basis. At the same time, we are going to explore hospitalization rates in areas located more than 10 miles away from any freeway and compare it with hospitalization rates and pollutants in Los Angeles City. It is important to find one traffic-heavy location and another one which is relatively isolated from the freeway in order to see the consequences of frequent vehicle pollutants to people’s health. In terms of time, we decided to look into data within the past 5 years. Taking the pandemic into consideration, the data in the past 2 years may not be the most representative due to decreased traffic volume during “stay-at-home order” in 2020. Also, with the longer timeframe, we will compare and contrast the traffic volume pre-COVID and during-COVID to further explore the impacts of vehicle pollutants to surrounding areas by looking at the change in hospitalization rate due to air pollution related health problems.

## Data sources:
- The first dataset is a point GIS dataset of 2019 Traffic Volumes (Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT)) on the California Department of Transportation state highway network. It shows the annual average number of vehicles passing through each freeway measured by stationary checkpoints on each freeway. This dataset will be used to represent the traffic volume in LA City and compared with air pollutants data collected in that location and timeframe.https://gisdata-caltrans.opendata.arcgis.com/datasets/f71f49fb87b3426e9688fe66039170bc_0/explore?location=33.967074%2C-118.065377%2C10.52

- The second one is a dataset of the 2019 daily air quality index in the United States measured by several different instruments depending on the locations. It is a dataset posted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.https://aqs.epa.gov/aqsweb/airdata/download_files.html#AQI

- The third dataset contains an annual hospital inpatient summary treated in each hospital in California. The summary data include discharges, discharge days, average length of stay, age groups, race groups, sex, expected payer, type of care, do not resuscitate orders, admission source, admission type, discharge disposition, principal diagnosis groups and principal procedure groups. We will specifically look at the numbers indicating respiratory system disease and disorder.https://data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/hospital-inpatient-characteristics-by-facility-pivot-profile/resource/e335b3d8-b3cc-42f3-b354-8157779c006a

## Scope and resulting visualizations: 
First we would like to examine the 5 main types of pollutants released from vehicles on freeways. The pollutants we have identified so far for our study are VOC, CO2, CO, SO2 and NOx. We will use the data collected on these pollutans in a LA City to create a may layer. Once we have a visualization of how these pollutants are released and persist in the atmosphere, we would like to compare our air pollutants layer to another layer looking at hospitalization rates in LA City. Since vehicle pollutants have been linked to various respiratory related illnesses, we chose to look at hospitalization rates of residents in areas near freeways. Through our research, we will narrow down the cause of hospital admissions to select illnesses that are directly related to pollution. Map layers created from our data collection on air pollutants and hospitalization rates will help us identify whether or not there is a correlation to hospitalizations and proximity near a freeway.

There is data indicating that living near freeways could cause adverse health impacts, however, we were unable to find data that identifies what exact distance from the freeway is defined as “near” and whether or not there is a safe buffer zone. We hope to identify what distance away from the freeway constitutes as safe through our data and map layers. In addition to looking at proximity to freeways, we would like to study whether the specific locations near the freeways, for example residences on the east or west of the freeway, increase or decrease in hospitalization rates by looking at the wind direction and mapping that data in relation to the pollutant concentration. We also would like to compare pollutants and hospitalization rates in areas near the freeway vs areas located further away from freeways in similar geographic locations (i.e Southern California) to establish whether or not there is a correlation between proximity to freeways and hospitalizations rates. 

## What insights you expect to gain from your research:
Through our research, we would like to look at the correlation between hospitalization rates and proximity to freeways via pollutants released from vehicles. We would like to identify whether or not a safe buffer zone exists for people residing near freeways. We also would like to examine how this correlation relates to housing prices, socioeconomic status, and demographics. 
